§ Beet and Ginger Soup with Cucumber

...

1 1/2 pounds small beets, trimmed and scrubbed
3 tablespoons olive oil
coarse sea salt
1 small leek, white and light green parts only, chopped
1 clove garlic, smashed
3 tablespoons chopped fresh ginger, or more to taste
3 cups chicken broth
3 cups water
juice of 1 lemon, or to taste
1/2 english cucumber, peeled, halved lengthwise, seeded, and chopped into 1/8 inch cubes crème fraîche, for serving

Heat the oven to 325 ℉. Place the beets in a bowl, sprinkle with 1 tablespoon oil, and season with salt. Toss to coat. Place the beets on half of a large sheet of aluminum foil and fold it over to make a pouch. Seal tightly. Put on a baking sheet, place in the oven, and roast until a fork easily pierces the beets, about 1 1/4 hours. Remove from the oven and let cool.
Peel off the skin and cut the beets in quarters.
Warm the remaining tablespoons olive oil in a soup pot over medium heat. Add the leek and cook, stirring occasionally, until it begins to soften, about 5 minutes. Add the garlic and ginger and cook for 2 minutes more. Season lightly with salt. Add the beets, chicken broth, and water, bring to a simmer, and cook for 10 minutes.
Transfer the soup, in batchs, to a food processor and process until smooth. Return the soup to the pot. Add lemon juice to taste. Then adjust the seasoning, adding more salt, lemon juice, and ginger if you wish.
Just before serving, add the cucumber and stir. Then ladle into bowls and serve. You can serve this with a dollop of Crème fraîche. The soup should not be too hot; it could even be served chilled or at room temperature.

Source: The Essential New York Times Cookbook: Classic Recipes for a New Century

§ Chicken Stock

This is a simple recipe for making chicken stock. Our favorite use of the chicken stock is to use it in place of water when cooking rice, usually Lundberg Jubilee, Gourmet Blend of Whole Grain Brown Rice or Lundberg California Sushi Rice. We often use the cooked chicken from this recipe to make the Curried Chicken Salad recipe.

4 pounds chicken
7 cups water
1 large onion, halved
3 stalks celery
3 carrots, cut into 2 inch pieces
1 bay leaf
1 teaspoon grated fresh ginger
salt to taste

Place the chicken in a large pot over high heat. Add water to cover and bring to a boil, then reduce heat to medium low and simmer for 1 hour.
Remove chicken from pot. Leave water in pot. Cool chicken. Remove skin and bones from meat. Return bones and skin to pot. Add onions, carrots, celery, bay leaf, ginger, and salt. Continue simmering for 3 to 4 hours.
Strain and cool the stock, uncovered.
Use the meat for soups, salads, sandwiches, or other dishes where cooked chicken is needed. After stock has been defatted, use or freeze immediately. I freeze the stock in one cup amounts and use instead of water for cooking rice or vegetables or making gravy.

Photo: /chicken_stock.jpg

Source: All Recipes - http://allrecipes.com//Recipe/chicken-stock/Detail.aspx

§ Creamy Curried Sweet Potato Soup

...

1 1/2 tablespoons olive oil
1 cup onion, coarsely chopped
1 large clove garlic, coarsely chopped
1 tablespoon fresh ginger, coarsely grated
1 teaspoon ground cumin
1/2 teaspoon ground coriander
1/4 teaspoon ground cardamom
1/4 teaspoon tumeric
1/8 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
2 1/2 pounds sweet potatoes, peeled and sliced 1/4 inch thick
6 cups chicken broth, or as needed
salt and freshly ground black pepper
6 to 8 teaspoons fresh cheese

Heat the oil in a pot large enough to hold all the ingredients. Add the onion and sauté over medium heat until it begins to brown, about 10 minutes. Add the garlic and sauté, stirring, for 30 seconds. Add the ginger, cumin, coriander, cardamom, turmeric, and red pepper flakes, if using, and stir well. Add the sweet potatoes and broth and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat and simmer until the sweet potatoes are soft, about 20 minutes.
Puree the soup in batches in a blender or food processor. Season to taste with salt and pepper. The soup can be made ahead of time and refrigerated. Reheat slowly to serve. If the soup is too think, add a little more stock.
Ladle into mugs, top each serving with a teaspoon of cheese, and stir to melt a little.

Photo: /creamy_curried_sweet_potato_soup.jpg

Source: The Essential New York Times Cookbook: Classic Recipes for a New Century

§ Crispy Sesame Carrots

A colorful tasty side dish or snack. A mandoline works well for slicing the carrots into uniformly thin rounds.

2 pounds carrots, sliced into thin rounds
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon toasted sesame oil
coarse sea salt
2 tablespoons toasted sesame seeds
2 tablespoons toasted black sesame seeds

Preheat oven to 350 ℉
In large sauté pan over medium heat, sauté sliced carrots in olive oil until just soft, about 6 minutes. Remove from heat, toss with toasted sesame oil and sea salt to taste, spread out on cookie sheet and bake 30 minutes. Check frequently and move carrots around to prevent burning. Remove from oven, toss with sesame seeds and serve.

Photo: /crispy_sesame_carrots.jpg

Source: Clean Food: A Seasonal Guide to Eating Close to the Source with More Than 200 Recipes for a Healthy and Sustainable You

§ Curried Chicken Salad

I am surprised at how delicious this recipe turns out and it could not be simpler to make. The cooked chicken from the Chicken Stock recipe works great in this recipe and so I often make the two recipes together.

1 pound cooked chicken, diced
3 celery stalks, diced
2 scallions, minced
3 tablespoons parsley, minced
4 tablespoons Homemade Mayonnaise
1 1/2 teaspoons curry powder
1/4 teaspoon sea salt
freshly ground black pepper

In a large bowl combine all ingredients.

Photo: /curried_chicken_salad.jpg

Source: The Whole Truth Eating and Recipe Guide - http://www.amazon.com/Whole-Truth-Eating-Recipe-Guide/dp/0977869318

§ Curried Zucchini Soup

My favorite soup to date. One of the recipes from "The Essential New York Cookbook" that we have made and enjoyed. The soup is best made in the summer with in-season baby zucchinis.

6 small zucchini, chopped
1 large onion, thinly sliced
1 tablespoon fresh ginger root, grated
1 1/2 teaspoons curry powder
1/2 teaspoon dry mustard
3 cups chicken broth
3 tablespoons raw rice
1 1/2 cups whole milk
sea salt
black pepper, freshly ground
chives, minced

Combine the zucchini, onion, ginger, curry powder, and mustard in a saucepan, add the chicken broth and rice, and bring to a boil. Cover and simmer for about 45 minutes.
Puree the mixture with an immersion blender. Add the milk and season with salt and pepper. Chill thoroughly or serve hot. Garnish with chives.

Photo: /curried_zucchini_soup.jpg

Source: The Essential New York Times Cookbook: Classic Recipes for a New Century

§ French Chicken in a Pot

This chicken dish is wonderfully aromatic from the moment the sautéing begins and results in a sauce that is equally wonderful. The left over sauce works great as an ingredient in other recipes. Oh, and the chicken is tasty too.

1 whole roasting chicken
2 teaspoons gray sea salt
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 onion, chopped
3 fennel stalks, chopped
6 garlic cloves, peeled and trimmed
1 bay leaf
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
1 teaspoon lemon juice

Adjust an oven rack to lowest position. Preheat oven to 250 ℉.
Pat the chicken dry with paper towels and season with salt and pepper.
In a 6 3/4 quart Dutch oven over medium, heat the oil until just smoking. Add the chicken, breast-side down. Scatter the onion, fennel stalk, garlic, bay leaf, and rosemary around chicken.
Cook until the breast is lightly browned, about 5 minutes. Flip the chicken breast-side up and cook until chicken and vegetables are well browned, 6 to 8 minutes.
Remove the Dutch oven from the heat. Place a large sheet of foil over the pot, then cover tightly with the lid.
Transfer the pot to the oven and cook until a thermometer registers 160 ℉ when inserted in thickest part of breast. A 3 1/2 to 4 1/2 pound chicken will take about an hour to cook, and a 5 to 6 pound bird will take close to 2 hours.
Transfer the chicken to carving board, tent with foil and let rest for 20 minutes.
Meanwhile, strain chicken juices from the pot through fine-mesh strainer into a fat separator, pressing on solids to extract liquid. Discard the solids. You should have about 3/4 cup of juices.
Allow the liquid to settle 5 minutes, then pour into a saucepan and set over low heat.
Carve the chicken, adding any accumulated juices to the saucepan. Stir lemon juice into the saucepan to create the jus, or sauce. Serve the chicken, passing jus at table.

Source: January/February 2008 issue of Cook's Illustrated magazine

§ French Lentils with Roasted Root, Caramelized Onions and Thyme

Lentils are a perfect compliment to winters colorful and sweet roots and squashes. Not only are there great source of protein, but their somewhat earthy and savory taste enhances a variety of winter meals. Although there are three main steps required to make this recipe, the prep time is minimal. This dish goes great with sautéed mustard greens, kale and/or collards.

1 rutabaga, peeled and diced
1 celeriac, peeled and diced
4 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
3/4 cup dried French lentils
3 cups vegetable stock
sea salt
4 tablespoons lemon juice
1 large red onion, diced
4 cups thinly sliced mushrooms
1 tablespoon mirin
2 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves, minced
chopped fresh parsley

Preheat oven to 400 ℉.
Place rutabaga and celeriac in 8 x 8 inch baking dish, drizzle with 2 teaspoons olive oil and roast 20 minutes. Remove from oven and toss. Return to oven and roast an additional 20 minutes or until soft. Remove from oven and set aside.
While vegetables are roasting, rinse lentils and place in pot with vegetable stock and a pinch of salt. Bring to boil, reduce heat, cover and simmer until just tender, about 20 minutes. Remove from heat and drain well. Toss with 1 tablespoon oil and 1 tablespoon lemon juice and set aside. 
In large skillet over medium heat, sauté onion in remaining tablespoon olive oil until it starts to brown, 5 to 7 minutes. Add mushrooms and mirin and continue sautéing. Add remaining 3 tablespoons lemon juice 1 tablespoon at a time to deglaze pan and caramelized vegetables. Add thyme and sauté 2 minutes longer, for a total sauté time of 12 to 14 minutes. Fold in lentils and roasted vegetables and sauté to heat through. Season to taste with salt, toss with parsley and serve.

Photo: /french_lentils_with_roasted_root.jpg

Source: Clean Start: Inspiring You to Eat Clean and Live Well with 100 New Clean Food Recipes

§ Homemade Mayonnaise

...

1 whole egg + 1 egg white
1 teaspoon prepared Dijon mustard
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar
generous pinch of sea salt
3/4 cup olive oil

Puree all ingredients in the food processor, except olive oil. Slowly add olive oil in small amounts while the food processor is on -- be patient this takes time. Add more sea salt if desired. You could also add fresh herbs like parsley, or chives to make an herbed mayonnaise.

Source: The Whole Truth Eating and Recipe Guide - http://www.amazon.com/Whole-Truth-Eating-Recipe-Guide/dp/0977869318

§ Red Lentil Soup with Lemon

Quick, easy, and delicious.

3 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for drizzling
1 large onion, chopped
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 teaspoon ground cumin
1/2 teaspoon kosher salt
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 large pinch of cayenne pepper
4 cups chicken broth
2 cups water
1 cup red lentils, picked over and rinsed
1 large carrot, peeled and diced
juice of 1/2 lemon
3 tablespoons cilantro, chopped

Heat the oil in a large pot over high heat until hot and shimmering. Add the onion and garlic and sauté until golden, about 4 minutes. Stir in the tomato paste, cumin, salt, black pepper, and chile powder and sauté for 2 minutes. Add the broth, water, lentils, and carrot and bring to a simmer, then partially cover the pot and turn the heat to medium-low. Simmer until the lentils are soft, about 30 minutes. Taste and add salt if necessary.
Using an immersion or regular blender or a food processor, puree half the soup, then return it to the pot; don't over-puree it, the soup should be somewhat chunky. Reheat the soup if necessary, then stir in the lemon juice and cilantro. Serve drizzled with olive oil and dusted lightly with chile powder if desired.

Photo: /red_lentil_soup_with_lemon.jpg

Source: The Essential New York Times Cookbook: Classic Recipes for a New Century

§ Seaweed and Cabbage Sauté

We have yet to try this recipe. The description from the Clean Food book is as follows: I crave this powerhouse combination in the spring for its incredible cleansing and healing properties. Sea vegetables are loaded with easily absorbable calcium. Cabbage is a tonic for the stomach and digestive system, a blood alkalinizer, and a rich source of antioxidants, vitamins and minerals. Now that's strong medicine! This recipe doubles easily and keeps 4 to 5 days.

1 cup dried arame
1 teaspoon grapeseed oil
1 red onion, cut into matchsticks
3 carrots, cut into matchsticks
1/2 small cabbage, thinly sliced
2 tablespoons tamari
2-3 dashes ume plum vinegar
1 tablespoon toasted sesame oil

Soak arame in 4 cups of water for 15 minutes, drain well and set aside.
In large skillet over medium head, sauté onion in grapeseed oil until translucent, 3 minutes. Add carrots and sauté until all vegetables have softened. Add seaweed and cook to heat through. Remove from heat, add vinegar and toasted sesame oil and serve warm or chilled.

Source: Clean Food: A Seasonal Guide to Eating Close to the Source with More Than 200 Recipes for a Healthy and Sustainable You

§ Sesame Ginger Cucumber Salad

I love this delightful cucumber salad and make it often. The cooling and healthy properties of the cucumbers are welcome, especially during the summer months. The exact ingredient amounts do not matter as much as their balance. Buon appetito.

1 large English cucumber, julienned
1 tablespoon toasted sesame oil
1 tablespoon brown rice oil
2 teaspoons ginger root, freshly grated
2 teaspoons raw honey
1 pinch sea salt

In a bowl whisk together toasted sesame oil, brown rice oil, ginger root, and honey into a dressing.
Place cucumber in a large bowl, pour dressing over it, and toss gently to coat.

Photo: /sesame_ginger_cucumber_salad.jpg

Source: original creation

§ Spicy Black Bean Dip

...

1 garlic clove, minced
3 tablespoons chopped red onion
3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
2 tablespoons chopped chiles
1/8 teaspoon chile powder
1 1/2 cups cooked black beans
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon tomato paste
1/2 teaspoon salt

In small skiller over medium heat, sauté garlic and onion in 1 1/2 tablespoons olive oil until soft, about 3 minutes. Add chiles and chile powder and remove from heat.
Place black beans in food processor and pulse to chop. Add onion mixture, tomato paste, salt and remaining 1 1/2 tablespoons oil. Pulse to combine and continue processing until desired texture is achieved. Serve at room temperature or refrigerate to chill.

Source: Clean Start: Inspiring You to Eat Clean and Live Well with 100 New Clean Food Recipes

§ Tangy Braised Cabbage

...

8 tablespoons butter
2 tablespoons mirin
2 large onion, quartered and thinly sliced
2 large tart apple, peeled, cored, finely diced
1 head of cabbage, coarsely chopped or shredded, about 8 cups
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
5 tablespoons brown rice vinegar
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar
salt, to taste

In a Dutch oven, heat butter over low heat; add onion and apple; sauté for about 7 to 10 minutes, or until soft. Add cabbage, pepper, vinegar, and mirin; toss to blend well. 
Cover tightly and place in over for 30 minutes at 425 ℉. Reduce heat to 375 ℉ and bake for another hour, or until the cabbage is thoroughly tender; stir occasionally as it cooks. Add salt to taste. 

Photo: /tangy_braised_cabbage.jpg

Source: Southern Food - http://southernfood.about.com/od/cabbagerecipes/r/bl70115a.htm

§ Vegetable Stock

This is a basic vegetable stock recipe that is a tasty and healty addition to many recipes. The recipe is from Deborah Madison's book Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone. The book has a great section on vegetable stocks which I will be consulting as I look to incorporate more ingredients.

1 large onion
2 large carrots
2 fennel stocks, including a few leaves
1 bunch scallions, including half of the greens
leek trimmings: roots and leaves
1 tablespoon olive oil
8 garlic cloves, peeled and smashed
8 parsley branches
6 thyme sprigs or 1/2 teaspoon dried
2 bay leaves
sea salt

Scrub the vegetables and chop them roughly into 1 inch chunks. Heat the oil in a soup pot. Add the vegetables, garlic, and herbs and cook over high heat for 5 to 10 minutes, stirring frequently. The more color they get, the richer the flavor of the stock. Add 2 teaspoons salt and 2 quarts cold water and bring to boil. Lower the heat and simmer, uncovered, for 30 minutes. Strain. 

Photo: http://www.eikeon.com/vegetable_stock.jpg

Source: Deborah Madison's book Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone
